CAPTIONING MADE POSSIBLE
BY FRIENDS OF NCI
Niall Ferguson: WELCOME
TO THE WORLD OF MONEY.
BREAD, CASH, DOSH, DOUGH,
LOOT, LUCRE, MOOLAH,
THE READIES, THE WHEREWITHAL.
CALL IT WHAT YOU LIKE.
MONEY CAN BREAK US
OR IT CAN MAKE US.
IN THE PAST YEAR,
IT'S CERTAINLY BROKEN
MORE THAN A FEW
OF THE BIGGEST NAMES ON WALL
STREET AND IN FINANCIAL CENTERS
AROUND THE WORLD.
[HORNS HONKING]
AND WHILE FORMER MASTERS OF
THE UNIVERSE CRASH AND BURN,
THE REST OF US ARE LEFT WORRYING
IF OUR SAVINGS WOULD BE SAFER
IN A MATTRESS THAN IN A BANK.
WELL, I WANT TO EXPLAIN TO YOU
JUST HOW MONEY ROSE TO PLAY
SUCH A TERRIFYINGLY DOMINANT
ROLE IN ALL OUR LIVES.
WHAT'S MORE, I WANT TO
REVEAL FINANCIAL HISTORY
AS THE ESSENTIAL BACKSTORY
BEHIND ALL HISTORY.
BANKS FINANCED THE RENAISSANCE
WHILE THE BOND
MARKET DECIDED WARS.
[TRAIN WHISTLE BLOWS]
STOCK MARKETS BUILT EMPIRES...
AND MONETARY MELTDOWNS
MADE REVOLUTIONS.
FROM ANCIENT MESOPOTAMIA RIGHT
DOWN TO THE PRESENT DAY,
THE ASCENT OF MONEY HAS
BEEN AN INDISPENSABLE PART
OF THE ASCENT OF MAN.
BUT MONEY'S RISE HAS NEVER
BEEN A SMOOTH, UPWARD RIDE.
AS WE'LL SEE, FINANCIAL HISTORY
HAS REPEATEDLY BEEN INTERRUPTED
BY GUT-WRENCHING CRISES,
OF WHICH TODAY'S
IS JUST THE LATEST.
[PEOPLE SPEAKING EXCITEDLY]
Announcer: FUNDING FOR
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
Woman: MY IDEA CREATED
JOBS FOR 2,000 PEOPLE.
Man: MY IDEA WILL BRING
RENEWABLE ENERGY TO EVERYONE.
Announcer: AN
ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN IDEA
CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
AND BY...
Ferguson: IMAGINE A
WORLD WITH NO MONEY.
500 YEARS AGO, THE
MOST POWERFUL SOCIETY
IN SOUTH AMERICA,
THE INCA EMPIRE, HAD NO
REAL CONCEPT OF MONEY.
THE INCAS APPRECIATED
THE AESTHETIC QUALITIES
OF RARE METALS.
GOLD WAS THE SWEAT OF THE SUN,
SILVER THE TEARS OF THE MOON.
LABOR WAS THE UNIT OF
VALUE IN THE INCA EMPIRE
JUST AS IT WAS LATER SUPPOSED
TO BE IN A COMMUNIST SOCIETY.
BUT IN 1532, THE INCAS RAN INTO
A MAN WHOSE HUNGER FOR MONEY
HAD LED HIM ACROSS AN OCEAN.
FRANCISCO PIZARRO AND
HIS FELLOW CONQUISTADORES
HAD COME FROM SPAIN TO WHAT
THEY CALLED UPPER PERU,
INSPIRED BY THE
LEGEND OF EL DORADO--
THE REALM OF THE
GOLD-COVERED KING.
AFTER DEFEATING THE INCA ARMY
AT THE BATTLE OF CATAMARCA,
THEIR QUEST BEGAN IN EARNEST.
AT POTOSI IN WHAT IS NOW
BOLIVIA, THE SPANIARDS
STRUCK IT RICH.
THEY DISCOVERED THE CERRO RICO,
LITERALLY THE RICH HILL.
TOWERING NEARLY 16,000
FEET ABOVE SEA LEVEL,
IT WAS A MONEY MOUNTAIN.
IN THAT 250 YEARS
OF SPANISH RULE,
MORE THAN TWO BILLION OUNCES
OF SILVER WERE EXTRACTED
FROM MINES LIKE THIS ONE
14,000 FEET UP IN THE ANDES.
WHAT THE INCAS COULDN'T GRASP
WAS WHY THE EUROPEANS HAD
SUCH AN INSATIABLE LUST
FOR GOLD AND SILVER.
THEY COULDN'T UNDERSTAND
THAT TO PIZARRO
AND THE CONQUISTADORES,
SILVER WAS MUCH MORE
THAN JUST SHINY METAL.
IT COULD BE MADE INTO MONEY--
A STORE OF VALUE, A UNIT OF
ACCOUNT, PORTABLE POWER.
[RUMBLING]
I MUST SAY, I FIND THIS
PLACE PRETTY HARROWING.
THE SPANIARDS HAD A
SYSTEM OF FORCED LABOR,
WHICH MEANT THAT EVERY
ABLE-BODIED MALE IN
THE NATIVE POPULATION
HAD TO DO A STINT
DOWN IN THESE MINES.
AND YOU CAN SEE WHY ONE IN 8 OF
THEM DIDN'T SURVIVE THE ORDEAL.
TODAY, 500 YEARS LATER,
CONDITIONS FOR MINERS
IN THE CERRO RICO
HAVEN'T IMPROVED MUCH,
BUT AT LEAST THEY GET
PAID FOR THE WORK THEY DO.
IN THOSE DAYS, IT WAS A
WAY OF MAKING MONEY THAT
VERGED ON GENOCIDE.
THE SILVER ORE WAS GROUND
UP, REFINED WITH MERCURY,
AND THEN SHIPPED TO
EUROPE AS BARS AND COINS.
EMPIRE, IT SEEMED, HAD
MADE THE SPANISH CROWN RICH
BEYOND THE DREAMS OF AVARICE.
AND YET ALL THE SILVER IN THE
MINES OF POTOSI COULDN'T HALT
THE INEXORABLE ECONOMIC
AND POLITICAL DECLINE
OF SPAIN'S EMPIRE.
WHY WAS THAT WHEN PIZARRO
SEEMED TO HAVE STRUCK
IT SO INCREDIBLY RICH?
THE ANSWER IS THAT THE SPANIARDS
HAD DUG UP SO MUCH SILVER
TO FINANCE THEIR
WARS OF CONQUEST
THAT THE METAL ITSELF
SUFFERED AN EXTRAORDINARY
DECLINE IN VALUE.
MORE SILVER COINS DIDN'T
MAKE SPAIN RICHER,
THEY SIMPLY MADE PRICES
HIGHER AS AN INCREASED
QUANTITY OF MONEY
CHASED THE SAME AMOUNT OF GOODS.
WHAT THE SPANIARDS DIDN'T GET
WAS THAT MONEY IS ONLY WORTH
WHAT OTHER PEOPLE WILL GIVE
FOR THE EXCHANGE FOR IT.
ON THE BACK OF THE $10 BILL,
IT SAYS IN GOD WE TRUST.
BUT IT'S NOT REALLY
GOD YOU'RE TRUSTING IN.
BY SWAPPING YOUR
GOODS OR YOUR LABOR
FOR A FISTFUL OF THESE THINGS,
YOU'RE TRUSTING THE
U.S. TREASURY SECRETARY
NOT TO REPEAT SPAIN'S
MISTAKE AND PRODUCE SO
MANY OF THE DAMN THINGS
THAT BY THE TIME YOU
COME TO SPEND THEM,
THEY'RE WORTH EVEN LESS THAN
THE PAPER THEY'RE PRINTED ON.
THAT'S WHAT THE
CONQUISTADORES GOT WRONG.
THEY FAILED TO SEE THAT MONEY
IS ABOUT TRUST, EVEN FAITH--
TRUST IN THE PERSON
PAYING YOU THE MONEY,
TRUST IN THE CENTRAL
BANK ISSUING THE MONEY,
TRUST IN THE COMMERCIAL
BANK THAT HONORS THE CHECK.
MONEY ISN'T METAL,
IT'S TRUST INSCRIBED.
AND IT DOESN'T MUCH MATTER
WHAT IT'S INSCRIBED ON--
PAPER, SILVER,
CLAY, OR A SCREEN
PROVIDED THE RECIPIENT
BELIEVES IN IT.
THERE WAS ONE HUGE
POSSIBILITY CREATED
BY THE EMERGENCE OF MONEY AS
A SYSTEM OF MUTUAL TRUST--
A POSSIBILITY THAT WOULD
REVOLUTIONIZE WORLD HISTORY.
IT WAS THE IDEA THAT
YOU COULD RELY ON PEOPLE
TO BORROW MONEY FROM YOU
AND PAY IT BACK AT
SOME FUTURE DATE.
THAT'S WHY THE ROOT
OF CREDIT IS CREDO, THE
LATIN FOR I BELIEVE.
WITHOUT THE
INVENTION OF CREDIT,
THE ENTIRE ECONOMIC
HISTORY OF OUR WORLD
WOULD HAVE BEEN IMPOSSIBLE.
BECAUSE WE TAKE IT FOR GRANTED,
WE TEND TO UNDERESTIMATE
THE EXTENT TO WHICH OUR
ENTIRE CIVILIZATION IS BASED
ON THE BORROWING AND
LENDING OF MONEY.
NO, IT DOESN'T LITERALLY
MAKE THE WORLD GO ROUND,
BUT IT DOES MAKE VAST
QUANTITIES OF PEOPLE,
GOODS, AND SERVICES
GO AROUND THE WORLD,
FROM BABYLON TO BOLIVIA.
THE PUZZLE IS THAT
THE EARLY MONEYLENDERS
GOT SO LITTLE THANKS
FOR THEIR SERVICES.
ON THE CONTRARY. THEY WERE
WIDELY REVILED AS PARIAHS.
WHY WAS THAT?
[METAL CLANGING]
[BIRDS CHIRP]
WELCOME TO NORTHERN ITALY
IN THE YEAR 1200 A.D...
A LAND DIVIDED INTO MULTIPLE
FEUDING CITY-STATES...
A LAND WHERE TRUST WAS
IN RATHER SHORT SUPPLY.
AMONG THE MANY REMNANTS OF
THE DEFUNCT ROMAN EMPIRE
WAS A NUMERICAL SYSTEM
SINGULARLY ILL-SUITED
TO COMPLEX MATHEMATICAL
CALCULATION,
LET ALONE THE NEEDS OF COMMERCE.
NOWHERE WAS THIS MORE OF
A HANDICAP THAN IN PISA,
WHERE MERCHANTS
STRUGGLED TO DO BUSINESS
WITH 7 DIFFERENT FORMS OF
COINAGE IN CIRCULATION.
EVEN THE SIMPLEST TRANSACTION
COULD BE A HEADACHE,
REQUIRING THE USE OF AN ABACUS.
BY COMPARISON, ECONOMIC
LIFE IN THE EASTERN WORLD--
IN THE MUSLIM CALIPHATE OR
THE SUNG CHINESE EMPIRE--
TO DISCOVER MODERN FINANCE BACK
WHEN EUROPE NEEDED TO IMPORT IT.
ENTER A YOUNG MATHEMATICIAN
CALLED LEONARDO OF PISA,
THE SON OF A PISAN
CUSTOMS OFFICIAL BASED
IN WHAT IS NOW ALGERIA,
FIBONACCI IS BEST
REMEMBERED TODAY
FOR HIS SEQUENCE OF NUMBERS THAT
MIMIC THE PROPERTIES OF NATURE.
BUT THE FAMOUS SEQUENCE
WAS ONLY ONE OF MANY
EASTERN MATHEMATICAL IDEAS
THAT FIBONACCI
INTRODUCED TO EUROPE
WITH HIS PATH-BREAKING
BOOK THE LIBER ABACI,
THE BOOK OF CALCULATION.
EVEN MORE IMPORTANT
WAS HIS DEMONSTRATION
OF THE SUPERIORITY OF ARABIC
NUMERALS OVER ROMAN NUMERALS.
AND, CRUCIALLY, NEARLY
ALL FIBONACCI'S EXAMPLES
RELATED TO BUSINESS.
SINCE ROMAN TIMES, EUROPEANS
HAD BEEN STRUGGLING TO DO
SIMPLE ARITHMETIC WITH THESE...
THE HINDU, OR
ARABIC, NUMERALS MADE
ALL KINDS OF CALCULATION EASIER.
IN PARTICULAR,
FIBONACCI SHOWED
HOW THE NEW METHODS
OF CALCULATION
COULD BE APPLIED TO
COMMERCIAL BOOKKEEPING,
TO CURRENCY CONVERSIONS,
AND, CRUCIALLY, TO THE
COMPUTATION OF INTEREST.
JUST IMAGINE TRYING TO WORK OUT
PERCENTAGES IN ROMAN NUMERALS.
FIBONACCI'S LIBER ABACI
MADE IT CHILD'S PLAY.
THIS WAS TO BE THE APPLICATION
OF MATHEMATICS TO MAKING MONEY.
THE MOST FERTILE SOIL FOR SUCH
FINANCIAL SEEDS PROVED TO BE
THE ITALIAN CITY-STATES.
FIBONACCI'S HOMETOWN
OF PISA WAS ONE,
BUT IT WAS, ABOVE
ALL, VENICE--
MORE EXPOSED THAN ANY OF THE
OTHERS TO ORIENTAL INFLUENCES--
THAT BECAME THE GREAT
MONEY-LENDING LABORATORY...
AND THE HOME OF LITERATURE'S
MOST NOTORIOUS MONEYLENDER,
SHYLOCK, IN WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE'S THE
MERCHANT OF VENICE.
MAY YOU STEAD ME?
WILL YOU PLEASURE ME?
SHALL I KNOW YOUR ANSWER?
CRUCIALLY, SHYLOCK'S ONLY
PREPARED TO LEND THE MONEY
IF BASSANIO'S FRIEND,
THE MERCHANT ANTONIO,
IS PROVIDING THE SECURITY.
3,000 DUCATS FOR 3
MONTHS AND ANTONIO BOUND.
YOUR ANSWER TO THAT.
ANTONIO IS A GOOD MAN.
BY GOOD, SHYLOCK
DOESN'T MEAN VIRTUOUS.
HE MEANS GOOD FOR THE MONEY
HE'S ABOUT TO LEND BASSANIO.
IN OTHER WORDS, CREDITWORTHY.
HAVE YOU HEARD ANY
IMPUTATION TO THE CONTRARY?
HA HA. HO, NO, NO, NO, NO.
MY REASON IN SAYING
THAT HE'S A GOOD MAN IS
TO HAVE YOU UNDERSTAND ME
THAT HE IS SUFFICIENT.
3,000 DUCATS.
I THINK I MAY TAKE HIS BOND.
Ferguson: WITH ANY LOAN,
THINGS CAN GO WRONG,
AND THAT IS PRECISELY
WHY ANYONE WHO LENDS
MONEY TO A MERCHANT,
IF ONLY FOR THE DURATION
OF AN OCEAN VOYAGE,
NEEDS TO BE COMPENSATED.
WE USUALLY CALL THE
COMPENSATION INTEREST--
THE AMOUNT PAID TO THE
LENDER OVER AND ABOVE THE
SUM LENT, OR PRINCIPAL.
OVERSEAS TRADE OF THE
SORT VENICE DEPENDED ON
COULDN'T OPERATE WITHOUT
SUCH TRANSACTIONS.
AND THEY REMAIN THE FOUNDATION
OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
TO THIS DAY.
BUT WHY DOES SHYLOCK TURN
OUT TO BE SUCH A VILLAIN,
DEMANDING LITERALLY
A POUND OF FLESH--
IN EFFECT ANTONIO'S DEATH--
IF HE CAN'T FULFILL
HIS OBLIGATIONS?
WHY IS SHAKESPEARE'S
MONEYLENDER SO HEARTLESS,
THE ORIGINAL OF THAT
BLOODSUCKING FINANCIER
WHO RECURS TIME AND AGAIN
IN WESTERN LITERATURE?
ONE CLUE IS THAT
SHYLOCK IS A JEW,
AND JEWS WERE AMONG HISTORY'S
EARLIEST MONEYLENDERS.
JEWS WHO STAYED IN VENICE
FOR MORE THAN TWO WEEKS
WERE SUPPOSED TO WEAR A
YELLOW O ON THEIR BACKS
OR A YELLOW HAT,
AND THEY WERE CONFINED
TO A SPECIAL AREA,
WHICH BECAME KNOWN
AS THE GHETTO NUOVO.
THIS IS THE ENTRANCE TO THE
JEWISH GHETTO IN VENICE,
WHERE JEWS WERE OBLIGED TO LIVE
AND INDEED CONFINED AT NIGHT.
JEWS WERE TOLERATED IN
VENICE BUT FOR A REASON.
THE KEY WAS THAT JEWS
COULD PROVIDE A SERVICE
THAT CHRISTIAN MERCHANTS
WERE FORBIDDEN TO DO.
THEY COULD CHARGE
INTEREST ON THEIR LOANS.
FIBONACCI MIGHT HAVE FIGURED
OUT THE MATHEMATICS OF LENDING,
BUT IT TOOK SHYLOCK
TO DO THE DEAL.
THIS IS WHERE THE VENETIAN
JEWS USED TO DO BUSINESS.
THIS BUILDING HERE WAS
THE OLD BANCO ROSSO.
AND IT WAS OUTSIDE HERE
THAT THEY USED TO SIT,
BEHIND THEIR TABLES,
THEIR TAVOLE,
ON THEIR BENCHES,
THEIR BANCHI--
THE ROOTS OF THE ITALIAN
WORD FOR BANKS.
NOW, THERE WAS A GOOD
REASON WHY MERCHANTS CAME
HERE TO THE JEWISH GHETTO
TO BORROW MONEY.
FOR CHRISTIANS, WHAT
THE JEWS WERE DOING--
LENDING MONEY AT
INTEREST-- WAS A SIN.
THE MEDIEVAL CHURCH'S
LAWS AGAINST USURY--
CHARGING INTEREST ON LOANS--
WERE A MAJOR OBSTACLE
TO THE DEVELOPMENT
OF FINANCE IN EUROPE.
AFTER ALL, WHAT
GOD-FEARING CHRISTIAN
MERCHANT WISHED TO RISK
THE TORMENTS OF HELL?
THIS ASTONISHING VISION OF
ETERNAL DAMNATION WAS PAINTED
BY GIORGIO VASARI
AND FEDERICO ZUCCARI
ON THE INSIDE OF THE GREAT
DOME OF FLORENCE'S CATHEDRAL--
AND BELOW THERE'S ANOTHER
FRESCO BY DOMENICO DI MICHELINO
OF FLORENCE'S GREATEST
POET, DANTE ALIGHIERI,
HOLDING HIS MASTERWORK,
THE DIVINE COMEDY.
ACCORDING TO DANTE, THERE
WAS A SPECIAL PART OF THE
SEVENTH CIRCLE OF HELL
THAT WAS EXCLUSIVELY
SET ASIDE FOR USURERS.
THERE THE MONEYLENDERS
WERE ETERNALLY TORTURED
WITH SCORCHING EARTH
AND FREEZING SNOW,
THEIR NECKS WEIGHED DOWN
WITH BULGING PURSES.
JEWS, TOO, WEREN'T SUPPOSED
TO LEND AT INTEREST,
BUT THERE WAS A
CONVENIENT GET-OUT CLAUSE
IN THE OLD TESTAMENT BOOK OF
DEUTERONOMY, CHAPTER 23.
YOU WEREN'T SUPPOSED TO LEND
TO YOUR BROTHER AT INTEREST,
BUT TO A STRANGER? WELL,
THAT WAS A DIFFERENT MATTER.
IN OTHER WORDS, A JEW
COULDN'T LEND TO A JEW,
BUT HE COULD LEND
TO A CHRISTIAN.
THE PRICE THE JEWS PAID FOR
PERFORMING THIS SERVICE WAS
SOCIAL EXCLUSION.
HENCE THE GHETTO, AND HENCE
THE CENTURIES-LONG ASSOCIATION
BETWEEN JEWS AND FINANCE--
ONE OF THE FEW FORMS
OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
FROM WHICH JEWS WERE
NOT ONCE EXCLUDED.
IN THE END, OF COURSE,
SHYLOCK IS THWARTED,
FOR ALTHOUGH THE COURT
RECOGNIZES HIS RIGHTS
TO A POUND OF FLESH,
THE LAW ALSO PROHIBITS HIM
FROM SHEDDING ANTONIO'S BLOOD.
AND BECAUSE HE'S A JEW,
THE LAW ALSO REQUIRES
THE LOSS OF HIS GOODS AND LIFE
FOR SO MUCH AS PLOTTING
THE DEATH OF A CHRISTIAN.
HE ONLY ESCAPES BY
SUBMITTING TO BAPTISM.
IT TURNS OUT TO BE A RISKY
BUSINESS TO BE A MONEYLENDER.
BUT IT WAS IN ANOTHER ITALIAN
CITY-STATE, FLORENCE,
THAT THE KEY FINANCIAL SERVICE
OF PROVIDING CREDIT MOVED
OUT OF THE GHETTO AND AWAY
FROM THE GATES OF HELL
TO BECOME THE LEGITIMATE
PRESERVE OF BANKS.
THIS TRANSITION WAS SYMBOLIZED
BY THE RISE OF ONE FAMILY--
THE MEDICI.
WITH THEIR ASCENT,
CREDIT CAME OF AGE.
MONEY-LENDING CEASED
TO BE DISREPUTABLE.
IT BECAME GLORIOUS
AND THE FOUNDATION OF
A NEW KIND OF POWER.
THE DAZZLING LEGACY
OF THE MEDICI FAMILY'S
PAST STILL SURROUNDS YOU
IN FLORENCE TODAY.
IN THE SPACE OF 400 YEARS, TWO
MEDICI BECAME QUEENS OF FRANCE,
3 BECAME POPE.
APPROPRIATELY IT
WAS MACHIAVELLI,
THE SUPREME THEORIST OF POWER,
WHO WROTE THEIR HISTORY.
PERHAPS NO OTHER FAMILY LEFT
SUCH AN IMPRINT ON AN AGE
AS THE MEDICI LEFT
ON THE RENAISSANCE.
YOU MIGHT EVEN SAY THAT THEY
PAID FOR THE RENAISSANCE,
THEIR PATRONAGE RUNNING
THE GAMUT OF GENIUS
FROM MICHELANGELO TO GALILEO.
AND THIS IN THE UFFIZI
GALLERY IS THE MEDICIS'
PRIVATE ART COLLECTION--
ONE OF THE MOST
SPECTACULAR EVER ASSEMBLED.
WHAT THE MILLIONS OF
TOURISTS WHO FLOCK HERE
GENERALLY FORGET TO ASK IS HOW
THE MEDICI PAID FOR ALL THIS.
THE SIMPLE ANSWER IS THAT THEY
WERE FOREIGN EXCHANGE DEALERS,
MEMBERS OF THE ARTE DE CAMBIO--
THE MONEY CHANGERS' GUILD--
WHO MADE IT BIG.
THEY WERE KNOWN AS
BANCHIERI OR TAVOLIERI
BECAUSE LIKE THE JEWS
OF VENICE, THEY LITERALLY
DID THEIR BUSINESS
SITTING ON BENCHES
BEHIND TABLES.
INDEED, THE ORIGINAL
MEDICI BANK, OR BENCH,
WAS LOCATED RIGHT HERE, IN
THE VIA DELL'ARTE DELLA LANA,
WOOL GUILD STREET.
PRIOR TO THE 1390s, THE
MEDICI WERE FLORENCE'S ANSWER
TO THE SOPRANOS,
A SMALL-TIME CLAN NOTABLE
MORE FOR LOW VIOLENCE
THAN FOR HIGH FINANCE.
IN A 17-YEAR PERIOD,
NO FEWER THAN 5 MEDICI
WERE SENTENCED TO DEATH
BY THE CRIMINAL COURTS
FOR CAPITAL CRIMES.
THEN CAME GIOVANNI
DI BICCI DE'MEDICI.
IT WAS HIS AIM TO MAKE THE
MEDICI TOTALLY LEGITIMATE.
PART OF THE SECRET
OF HIS SUCCESS WAS
AN INGENIOUS BIT OF
CREATIVE ACCOUNTING
THAT GOT THE MEDICI OFF THE
HOOK OF THE ANTI-USURY LAWS.
THESE LEDGERS OF THE
MEDICI BANK MAKE IT CLEAR
HOW IMPORTANT COMMERCIAL BILLS
FOR FINANCING FOREIGN TRADE
TRUE, THE CHURCH
PROHIBITED THE COLLECTION
OF INTEREST ON LOANS,
BUT THERE WAS NOTHING
TO PREVENT A SHREWD
TRADER FROM MAKING MONEY
ON TRANSACTIONS LIKE THESE,
WHICH INVOLVED
MULTIPLE CURRENCIES.
THERE WAS NO INTEREST
AND THEREFORE NO SIN,
SIMPLY A COMMISSION DEDUCTED
FOR THE CONVERSION OF
ONE CURRENCY INTO ANOTHER.
IF MONEY WAS ADVANCED
TO A PARTICULAR TRADER
FOR ANY LENGTH OF TIME,
THE COMMISSION WAS
THAT BIT LARGER.
IN THE SAME WAY,
DEPOSITORS WHO PUT THEIR
MONEY IN THE MEDICI BANK
WERE GIVEN DISCREZIONE
TO COMPENSATE THEM
FOR RISKING THEIR MONEY.
THIS WAS CREDIT, IN
OTHER WORDS, BUT WITH
THE INTEREST PAYMENTS
DISCREETLY CONCEALED.
NOW FOR THE FIRST
TIME, MONEY-LENDING HAD
EVOLVED INTO BANKING.
THE REAL STORY OF THE
SUCCESS OF THE MEDICI BANK
CAN BE FOUND HERE IN
THE LIBRO SEGRETO,
THE SECRET BOOK OF
GIOVANNI DI BICCI DE'MEDICI.
THE KEY WAS NOT SO MUCH
SIZE AS DIVERSIFICATION.
EARLIER ITALIAN BANKS
HAD BEEN MONOLITHIC
AND VERY VULNERABLE TO DEFAULT
BY A SINGLE BAD BORROWER.
BUT A MEDICI BANK WAS MADE UP
OF MULTIPLE INTERLOCKING
PARTNERSHIPS,
EACH IN SOME MEASURE
INDEPENDENT OF THE REST.
IT WAS THIS DECENTRALIZATION
THAT WAS THE KEY
TO THEIR ASTONISHING PROFITS.
UNDER GIOVANNI'S GUIDANCE, THE
MEDICI BANKING NETWORK EXTENDED
FROM FLORENCE TO VENICE TO ROME.
THE SCALE AND DIVERSITY OF
THE MEDICIS' OPERATIONS WAS
THE KEY TO REDUCING THE
RISKS OF MONEY-LENDING,
AND THEREFORE, ALSO,
THE COSTS TO BORROWERS.
THAT'S THE ESSENTIAL DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN LOAN SHARKS AND BANKS,
BETWEEN SHYLOCK AND THE MEDICI.
AND HERE'S THE PROOF
THAT IT WORKED--
PAGE AFTER PAGE OF
GIOVANNI'S ASSETS,
DECLARED FOR TAX PURPOSES,
AND CULMINATING IN A GRAND
TOTAL OF 91,089 FLORINS.
IN THOSE DAYS, THAT
WAS SERIOUS MONEY.
WHEN GIOVANNI DIED IN 1429,
HIS LAST WORDS WERE AN
EXHORTATION TO HIS HEIRS
TO MAINTAIN HIS STANDARDS
OF FINANCIAL ACUMEN.
HIS FUNERAL WAS ATTENDED BY
26 MEN OF THE NAME MEDICI,
WHO HAD MADE THE BUSINESS
OF BANKING RESPECTABLE
AND PROFITABLE
AS IT HAD NEVER BEEN BEFORE.
FOR HIS SON COSIMO, THE
ACCUMULATION OF WEALTH
COMBINED SEAMLESSLY WITH
THE ACCUMULATION OF POWER.
WITHIN 20 YEARS OF HIS FATHER'S
DEATH, COSIMO DE'MEDICI WAS
THE FLORENTINE STATE.
AS THE POPE HIMSELF PUT IT,
POLITICAL QUESTIONS ARE
SETTLED AT HIS HOUSE.
THE MAN HE CHOOSES
HOLDS OFFICE.
HE IT IS WHO DECIDES PEACE
AND WAR AND CONTROLS THE LAWS.
HE IS KING IN
EVERYTHING BUT NAME.
THIS BOTTICELLI'S MAINLY
FAMOUS FOR THE BEAUTY
OF ITS YOUNG SUBJECT,
BUT IT'S ACTUALLY INTENDED AS
A TRIBUTE TO A DEAD BANKER--
COSIMO DE'MEDICI.
THAT'S HIM THERE
ON THE MEDALLION,
AND YOU CAN JUST MAKE
OUT THE INSCRIPTION,
PATER PATRIAE-- THE
FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY.
IN 150 YEARS, THE MEDICI
HAD TRANSFORMED THEMSELVES
FROM BACKSTREET MONEYLENDERS
TO THE MOST POWERFUL
FINANCIAL FORCE IN EUROPE.
NOTHING COULD BETTER
ILLUSTRATE THE EXTRAORDINARY
ASCENT OF MONEY,
FOR WHAT THE MEDICI HAD
ACHIEVED WAS NOTHING LESS
THAN THE BIRTH OF
MODERN BANKING.
OTHERS HAD TRIED BEFORE,
BUT THE MEDICI WERE
THE FIRST BANKERS TO HIT
THE POLITICAL BIG TIME.
AND THEY DID IT BY LEARNING
ONE CRUCIAL LESSON.
IN FINANCE, SMALL
IS SELDOM BEAUTIFUL.
BY MAKING THEIR BANK BIGGER
AND MORE DIVERSIFIED,
THE MEDICI HAD FOUND A WAY
OF SPREADING THEIR RISKS.
AND BY FOCUSING ON
CURRENCY TRADING
RATHER THAN JUST LENDING,
THEY'D REDUCED THEIR EXPOSURE
TO DEFAULTS BY BORROWERS.
FOR COSIMO AND
HIS FAMILY, IT WAS A TRULY
BEAUTIFUL BUSINESS MODEL.
[TRAIN WHISTLE BLOWS]
YET BANKING WAS ONLY ONE
OF ITALY'S CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE ASCENT OF MONEY.
OF EQUAL IMPORTANCE
WAS THE BOND MARKET.
AS A GENERAL RULE, BANKS
FINANCED COMMERCE.
THE BOND MARKET
AROSE TO FINANCE WAR.
THE ANCIENT GREEK PHILOSOPHER
HERACLITUS HAD DECLARED
THAT WAR IS THE
FATHER OF ALL THINGS.
IT WAS CERTAINLY THE
FATHER OF THE BOND MARKET.
FOR MUCH OF THE 14th
AND 15th CENTURIES,
THE MEDIEVAL CITY-STATES
OF TUSCANY, FLORENCE,
PISA, AND SIENNA WERE
AT WAR WITH EACH OTHER.
THIS WAS WAR WAGED AS
MUCH BY MONEY AS BY MEN.
IN PIETER VAN DER HEYDEN'S
BATTLE OF THE MONEYBAGS
AND STRONGBOXES,
PIGGY BANKS, TREASURE CHESTS,
AND BARRELS FULL OF COINS
LAY INTO ONE ANOTHER
WITH LANCES AND SWORDS IN
A CHAOTIC FREE-FOR-ALL.
THE DUTCH VERSES INSCRIBED
AT THE BOTTOM READ
IT'S ALL FOR MONEY AND GOODS,
THIS FIGHTING AND QUARRELING.
BUT WHAT THEY MIGHT JUST
AS EASILY HAVE SAID IS
THAT WAR IS IMPOSSIBLE
IF YOU DON'T HAVE THE
MONEY TO PAY FOR IT.
[BELL RINGING]
AND THE WAY TO DO THAT,
THE ABILITY TO FINANCE WAR
THROUGH THE BOND MARKET, WAS
AN INVENTION OF THE
ITALIAN RENAISSANCE.
RATHER THAN REQUIRE THEIR
OWN CITIZENS TO DO THE
DIRTY WORK OF FIGHTING,
EACH CITY HIRED MILITARY
CONTRACTORS-- CONDOTTIERI--
WHO RAISED ARMIES
TO ANNEX LAND AND LOOT
TREASURE FROM THE OTHERS.
AMONG THE CONDOTTIERI
OF THE 1360s AND 1370s,
ONE STOOD HEAD AND
SHOULDERS ABOVE THE OTHERS.
[DRUM BEATING ON SOUNDTRACK]
THIS IS HIS PORTRAIT
IN FLORENCE'S DUOMO,
A THANK YOU FROM
A GRATEFUL PUBLIC.
UNLIKELY THOUGH IT MAY
SEEM, THIS MASTER MERCENARY
WAS AN ESSEX BOY.
SO SKILLFULLY DID HE WAGE
WAR THAT THE ITALIANS CALLED
SIR JOHN HAWKWOOD,
GIOVANNI ACUTO,
JOHN THE ACUTE.
THIS CASTLE WAS ONE OF MANY
PIECES OF PRIME REAL ESTATE
THE FLORENTINES GAVE HIM AS
A REWARD FOR HIS SERVICES.
BUT HAWKWOOD WAS A MERCENARY
WHO WAS WILLING TO FIGHT
FOR ANYONE WHO'D PAY HIM--
MILAN, PADUA,
PISA, OR THE POPE.
THESE DAZZLING FRESCOES IN
FLORENCE'S PALAZZO VECCHIO SHOW
THE ARMIES OF PISA AND
FLORENCE CLASHING IN 1364.
AT THAT TIME, HAWKWOOD WAS
FIGHTING ON THE SIDE OF PISA,
BUT 15 YEARS LATER, HE'D
SWITCHED SIDES. WHY?
BECAUSE FLORENCE WAS
WHERE THE MONEY WAS.
THE COST OF THESE INCESSANT WARS
PLUNGED ITALY'S CITY-STATES
INTO CRISIS.
EXPENDITURES EVEN IN YEARS
OF PEACE WERE RUNNING
AT DOUBLE OR MORE TAX REVENUES.
TO PAY THE LIKES OF
SIR JOHN HAWKWOOD,
FLORENCE WAS
DROWNING IN DEFICITS.
THIS WONDERFUL DOCUMENT FROM THE
FLORENTINE STATE ARCHIVE SHOWS
HOW THE CITY'S
DEBTS HAD EXPLODED
FROM AROUND 50,000 FLORINS
AT THE BEGINNING
OF THE 14th CENTURY
TO 5 MILLION BY 1427.
IT WAS QUITE LITERALLY
A MOUNTAIN OF DEBT.
HENCE THE NAME,
THE MONTE COMUNE.
BUT FROM WHOM
COULD THE FLORENTINES
POSSIBLY HAVE BORROWED
SUCH A VAST SUM?
THE ANSWER IS RIGHT
HERE-- FROM THEMSELVES.
IT WAS A REVOLUTIONARY
IDEA THAT WOULD CHANGE THE
WORLD OF MONEY FOREVER.
RATHER THAN PAYING DIRECT TAX,
CITIZENS WERE NOW
EFFECTIVELY OBLIGED
TO LEND MONEY TO
THEIR OWN GOVERNMENT.
AND THE FACT THAT THEY WERE
FORCED TO LEND THE MONEY MEANT
THAT THE INTEREST
PAYMENTS THEY EARNED WERE
NOT DEEMED TO BE USURY
BY THE CHURCH.
THESE DEBT INSTRUMENTS,
SIMPLE LINES IN A LEDGER,
WERE THE ORIGINAL
GOVERNMENT BONDS.
AND THE WONDERFUL
THING ABOUT THEM WAS
THAT IF YOU NEEDED
YOUR MONEY IN A HURRY,
YOU COULD SELL YOUR
BONDS TO OTHER CITIZENS.
THEY WERE LIQUID ASSETS.
WHAT THIS RECORD TELLS US IS
HOW FLORENCE TURNED ITS CITIZENS
INTO ITS BIGGEST INVESTORS.
THIS WARTIME EXPEDIENT
MARKED THE BIRTH OF
THE MODERN BOND MARKET.
EVERYONE WAS A WINNER.
BONDS HAD SAVED THE
CITY-STATE FROM BANKRUPTCY.
THE CITIZENS WERE HAPPY
EARNING THEIR INTEREST.
AND THE BOND MARKET LET THEM
BUY OR SELL AS THEY SAW FIT.
IT SEEMED AS IF THE PROBLEM OF
PUBLIC DEBT HAD BEEN SOLVED,
ALLOWING THE CITIZENS OF
FLORENCE TO TURN THEIR
MINDS TO HIGHER THINGS.
BUT THERE WAS JUST ONE PROBLEM
WITH THIS BRILLIANT IDEA.
THERE WAS A LIMIT TO HOW MANY
MORE OR LESS UNPRODUCTIVE WARS
COULD BE WAGED.
THE LARGER THE DEBTS OF
THE ITALIAN CITIES BECAME,
AND THE MORE BONDS WERE
ISSUED, THE LESS VALUABLE
THEY LOOKED TO INVESTORS.
AND THAT WAS EXACTLY THE
SEQUENCE OF EVENTS IN VENICE.
BY THE EARLY 16th CENTURY,
THE CITY HAD SUFFERED
A SERIES OF MILITARY REVERSES,
AND THE VALUE OF VENETIAN
BONDS HAD TAKEN A HAMMERING.
AT THE NADIR BETWEEN
1509 AND 1529,
VENETIAN MONTE NUOVO
BONDS WERE TRADING AT JUST
10% OF THEIR FACE VALUE.
NOW, IF YOU BUY A BOND
WHEN WAR IS RAGING,
YOU'RE TAKING A RISK,
THE RISK THAT THE CITY WON'T PAY
YOU BACK OR PAY YOUR INTEREST.
ON THE OTHER HAND, REMEMBER
THAT THE INTEREST IS PAID
ON THE FACE VALUE OF THE BOND,
SO IF YOU CAN BUY IT AT
JUST 10% OF ITS FACE VALUE,
YOU'RE EARNING A HANDSOME
RETURN OF MAYBE 50%.
AND THAT IS HOW THE
BOND MARKET WORKS.
IN A SENSE, YOU
GET RETURN FOR THE RISK
YOU'RE PREPARED TO TAKE.
AT THE SAME TIME, IT'S THE BOND
MARKET THAT SETS INTEREST RATES
FOR THE ECONOMY AS A WHOLE.
IF THE STATE HAS, IN
EFFECT, TO PAY 50%,
THEN SO DO ALL THE
OTHER BORROWERS.
THE BOND MARKET HAD
BEEN INVENTED TO HELP
PAY FOR ITS CITY'S WARS.
BUT NOW IT WAS SETTING
INTEREST RATES FOR EVERYONE.
ITS RISE TO POWER HAD BEGUN.
OVER THE NEXT TWO CENTURIES,
BONDS WOULD COME
TO RULE THE WORLD.
IF THE 15th AND 16th
CENTURIES HAD SEEN
A REVOLUTION IN MONEY
AND CREDIT AND THE BIRTH
OF THE BOND MARKET,
THEN THE NEXT STEP IN THE STORY
OF THE ASCENT OF MONEY WAS
THE RISE OF THE JOINT STOCK
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY.
BUT THE ABILITY OF THE COMPANY
TO TRANSFORM OUR LIVES
WOULD DEPEND ON
ANOTHER INNOVATION...
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
THE STOCK MARKET.
THE PRICE THAT PEOPLE
ARE PREPARED TO PAY
FOR A COMPANY'S SHARES
IN THE MARKET TELLS YOU
HOW MUCH MONEY THEY THINK
IT'LL MAKE IN THE FUTURE.
BUT AS WE'VE DISCOVERED
IN RECENT MONTHS
OF FINANCIAL TURMOIL,
STOCK MARKETS CAN
ALSO BE SHOCK MARKETS.
THE FUTURE IS
ALWAYS UNCERTAIN,
BUT WE HUMAN BEINGS ARE
PRONE TO OVER-OPTIMISM.
WHEN PRICES HERE IN THE
NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE
SURGE UPWARDS IN SYNCH,
IT'S AS IF INVESTORS ARE GRIPPED
BY A KIND OF
COLLECTIVE EUPHORIA,
WHAT THE FORMER
CHAIRMAN OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE, ALAN GREENSPAN,
ONCE FAMOUSLY CALLED
IRRATIONAL EXUBERANCE.
SO STOCK MARKETS REALLY
CAN BE LIKE SOAP BUBBLES.
WE NEVER QUITE KNOW WHEN
THEY'RE GONNA BURST.
NOTHING ILLUSTRATES MORE
CLEARLY THAN THE HISTORY
OF STOCK MARKET BUBBLES
HOW HARD HUMAN BEINGS FIND
IT TO LEARN FROM HISTORY.
HIDDEN AWAY AMONG THE MANY
SPLENDORS OF VENICE IS
A SMALL CLUE TO ONE OF THE MOST
ASTONISHING TALES OF ADVENTURE
IN ALL FINANCIAL HISTORY.
TO THE HONOR AND MEMORY
OF JOHN LAW OF EDINBURGH,
MOST DISTINGUISHED
COMPTROLLER
OF THE TREASURY
OF THE KINGS OF THE FRENCH.
THIS IS THE FINAL RESTING PLACE
OF THE MAN WHO INVENTED
THE STOCK MARKET BUBBLE.
AN AMBITIOUS SCOT, A CONVICTED
MURDERER, A COMPULSIVE GAMBLER,
HE NOT ONLY CAUSED
THE FIRST TRUE BOOM AND
BUST IN ASSET PRICES,
HE ALSO INDIRECTLY CAUSED
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION.
THERE WAS A TIME
WHEN JOHN LAW OWNED
A QUARTER OF WHAT IS
NOW THE UNITED STATES,
ONLY TO LOSE IT ALL IN
HISTORY'S FIRST GREAT CRASH.
FROM EDINBURGH TO
AMSTERDAM TO PARIS,
ALL THE WAY HERE TO NEW
ORLEANS AND FINALLY TO VENICE,
LAW'S STORY IS A CLASSIC
TALE OF BOOM AND BUST.
IT'S ALSO VERY MUCH A
STORY FOR OUR OWN TIMES.
HIDDEN AWAY HERE
IN THE WAREHOUSE OF THE
LOUISIANA STATE MUSEUM IS
THE ONLY KNOWN PAINTING
OF JOHN LAW. HERE HE IS.
WITH THAT LEAN AND HUNGRY LOOK,
HE REALLY IS FOR ALL THE WORLD
A SCOTSMAN ON THE MAKE.
THE PATH THAT
LED LAW FROM OBSCURITY TO
CELEBRITY TO NOTORIETY IS
A PATH THAT MANY OF THE
GREAT STOCK MARKET PLAYERS
HAVE FOLLOWED SINCE.
LAW WAS BORN HERE IN
EDINBURGH IN 1671,
THE SON OF A
SUCCESSFUL GOLDSMITH
AND HEIR TO THE
ESTATE OF LAURISTON.
IN 1694 WHILE
LIVING IN LONDON,
LAW KILLED A MAN IN
A DUEL OVER A WOMAN AND
WAS SENTENCED TO DEATH.
SOMEHOW LAW MANAGED
TO ESCAPE FROM PRISON
AND FLED TO AMSTERDAM.
HE COULDN'T HAVE PICKED A
BETTER TOWN TO LIE LOW IN.
BY THE 1690s, AMSTERDAM
WAS THE WORLD CAPITAL OF
FINANCIAL INNOVATION.
TO HELP FINANCE THEIR
WAR AGAINST SPAIN,
THE DUTCH HAD INTRODUCED
ONE OF THE WORLD'S FIRST
NATIONAL LOTTERIES.
TO PROTECT THEIR MERCHANTS
FROM DODGY COINAGE,
THEY'D CREATED THE WORLD'S
FIRST CENTRAL BANK.
BUT THE ONE THAT HAD THE
BIGGEST IMPACT ON LAW WAS
THE SINGLE GREATEST DUTCH
INVENTION OF THEM ALL--
THE COMPANY.
THE STORY OF THE COMPANY
HAD BEGUN A HUNDRED YEARS
BEFORE LAW'S ARRIVAL,
AS DUTCH TRADERS SPREAD
OUT ALL OVER THE WORLD
FROM MANHATTAN ISLAND TO
THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
BUT IT WAS ASIA THAT BECAME
THE PRIMARY TARGET OF DUTCH
COMMERCIAL EXPANSION? WHY?
THE EAST INDIES WERE SO ALLURING
BECAUSE OF THESE--SPICES.
PEPPER, CLOVES,
NUTMEG, GINGER.
EUROPEANS CRAVED THEM
TO FLAVOR THEIR FOOD,
BUT ALSO TO PRESERVE IT.
TRADITIONALLY THEY HAD COME
OVERLAND BY THE SPICE ROAD.
BUT THE DUTCH PLAN
WAS TO FETCH THEM THE
LONGER BUT QUICKER WAY,
AND THAT PUNGENT AROMA WAS THE
SMELL OF MONEY TO BE MADE.
THIS PAINTING SHOWS THE RETURN
OF ONE OF THE FIRST DUTCH FLEETS
THE INSCRIPTION READS 4 SHIPS
SAILED TO GO AND GET THE SPICES
TOWARDS BANTAM AND ALSO
ESTABLISH TRADING POSTS
AND CAME BACK RICHLY LADEN
TO THE POLES OF AMSTERDAM.
DEPARTED 1 MAY 1598,
RETURNED 19 JULY 1599.
THE ASIAN SPICE TRADE
WAS SO PROFITABLE
THAT JUST ONE RETURN TRIP COULD
PAY FOR THE CONSTRUCTION COSTS
OF A SHIP LIKE THIS,
THE JOURNEY AROUND THE
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE TO THE
EAST AND SO HAZARDOUS
THAT MERCHANTS HAD TO POOL
THEIR RESOURCES AND THEIR RISK.
THE RESULT WAS AROUND
6 FLEDGLING EAST
INDIA ENTERPRISES.
IN 1602 AT THE INSTIGATION
OF THE DUTCH GOVERNMENT,
THESE VARIOUS COMPANIES
CAME TOGETHER TO FORM
THE UNITED DUTCH EAST
INDIA CHARTERED COMPANY...
OR VEREENIGDE OOSTINDISCHE
COMPAGNIE FOR SHORT.
AND THIS IS ITS
ORIGINAL CHARTER,
WHICH SPELLS OUT THAT
THE COMPANY WAS TO ENJOY
A MONOPOLY ON ALL TRADE
FROM THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE
ALL THE WAY EAST TO THE
STRAITS OF MAGELLAN,
PRETTY MUCH HALF THE WORLD.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE
NEW ENTITY WAS NOVEL.
THE CAPITAL OF THE COMPANY
WAS DIVIDED UNEQUALLY
BETWEEN ALL THE
MAJOR DUTCH CITIES.
CITIZENS WERE INVITED TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE NEW VENTURE
BY INVESTING.
IT WAS THE FORM OF
THIS INVESTMENT THAT
WAS THE REAL NOVELTY.
THIS RATHER
WONDERFUL PAINTING IS
OF THE FAMILY OF
ONE OF THE FOUNDERS
OF THE DUTCH EAST
INDIA COMPANY--
FOR 6,000 GUILDERS, HE AND 16
OTHER SO-CALLED PARTICIPANTS
BECAME THE FIRM'S
MANAGING DIRECTORS--
THE BEWINDHEBBERS.
AFTER 1606, HOWEVER,
ANYONE WHO PUT HIS MONEY
INTO THE EAST INDIA
COMPANY RECEIVED
AN ACTIE--LITERALLY AN ACTION--
OR AS WE WOULD SAY A
PIECE OF THE ACTION,
A SHARE IN THE COMPANY'S
FUTURE PROFITS.
AND HERE IT IS--THE WORLD'S VERY
FIRST SHARE CERTIFICATE ISSUED
BY THE WORLD'S VERY FIRST
MULTINATIONAL COMPANY
ALMOST EXACTLY 4 CENTURIES AGO.
THREE YEARS LATER, BAS AND
HIS FELLOW DIRECTORS DECLARED
THAT ANY SHAREHOLDERS WHO
WANTED THEIR CASH BACK
COULD NOT HAVE IT REFUNDED BUT
WOULD HAVE TO SELL THEIR SHARES
TO ANOTHER INVESTOR.
OVERNIGHT, A MARKET FOR THE
COMPANY'S SHARES WAS BORN,
THE WORLD'S FIRST
TRUE STOCK MARKET.
THIS INVENTION WAS TO CHANGE
THE FACE OF FINANCE FOREVER
BECAUSE IT CREATED A MECHANISM
WHEREBY THE PRICE OF SHARES
WAS DETERMINED BY THE
LAWS OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND,
BY SELLERS AND BUYERS.
AND AS THE
RENEGADE SCOTSMAN JOHN LAW
COULDN'T HELP BUT NOTICE,
THE TRADING OF THESE
COMPANY STOCKS WAS MAKING
THE WORLD'S FIRST SHAREHOLDERS
VERY RICH INDEED.
BY 1610, THE WORLD'S FIRST
JOINT STOCK COMPANY,
THE DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY,
WAS READY TO CONQUER THE WORLD.
IT HAD A NEW CHARTER,
NEW SHAREHOLDERS,
AND A BURGEONING
TRADE IN THESE SHARES.
BUT IT HAD TO FIGHT
TO SURVIVE. LITERALLY.
[SPLASHING AND CLATTER]
HAVING ESTABLISHED A STRING
OF FACTORIES AND WAREHOUSES
ACROSS SOUTH ASIA
FROM JAVA TO INDIA,
THE COMPANY HAD TO STRUGGLE
TO KEEP THE SPANIARDS
AND THEIR ENGLISH
COMPETITORS AT BAY.
WITH 40 WARSHIPS AND A PRIVATE
ARMY OF 10,000 SOLDIERS,
THE DIRECTORS OF THE
EAST INDIA COMPANY WERE
THE ORIGINAL CORPORATE RAIDERS.
FOR THE DUTCH EAST
INDIA COMPANY,
FIREPOWER AND FOREIGN
TRADE WENT HAND IN HAND.
BUT THE KEY TO THE
COMPANY'S SUCCESS WASN'T
JUST ITS CANNONS,
LIKE THESE ONES ABOARD
THE BATAVIA, THE
PRIDE OF ITS FLEET.
LIKE ALL BIG COMPANIES,
IT WAS ABLE TO COMBINE
ECONOMIES OF SCALE
WITH REDUCED TRANSACTION COSTS
AND WHAT ECONOMISTS CALL
NETWORK EXTERNALITIES--
THE ABILITY TO POOL
INFORMATION BETWEEN MULTIPLE
EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS.
THE BATAVIA WAS
PART MAN-OF-WAR,
PART MULTINATIONAL CORPORATION.
THE BIG NETWORKED COMPANY
WAS SIMPLY MORE EFFICIENT.
THAT WAS WHY BY THE
1620s, IT HAD ESTABLISHED
A VIRTUAL MONOPOLY ON SPICE
EXPORTS FROM ASIA TO EUROPE.
THE WORLD'S FIRST MULTINATIONAL
WAS MAKING ITS SHAREHOLDERS
ENORMOUSLY WEALTHY.
I'M LOOKING HERE AT THE
ORIGINAL SHAREHOLDERS' REGISTER
OF THE DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY.
LITERALLY EVERY NAME
IN HERE WAS A WINNER.
IF YOU'D PUT A THOUSAND
GUILDERS INTO THE COMPANY
AT ITS VERY INCEPTION,
BY 1736, YOUR INVESTMENT
WOULD HAVE BEEN WORTH 7,000.
OVER ITS ENTIRE LIFETIME,
THE COMPANY PAID
AN AVERAGE ANNUAL
DIVIDEND OF 16 1/2%.
VIRTUALLY ALL ITS PROFITS WERE
PAID BACK TO THE SHAREHOLDERS.
DIRCK BAS' ORIGINAL
SHAREHOLDING OF 6,000 GUILDERS
HAD BEEN TRANSFORMED INTO
A 500,000 GUILDER FORTUNE.
TO JOHN LAW, LYING
LOW IN AMSTERDAM
HAVING ESCAPED THE
GALLOWS IN LONDON,
THE WORKINGS OF THE
DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY
CAME AS A REVELATION.
LAW WAS LIVING OFF HIS WINNINGS
AT THE GAMBLING TABLE,
BUT HE WAS FASCINATED
BY THE RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN THE COMPANY
WITH ITS SPLENDID OFFICES
IN THE HOOGSTRAAT,
THE NEARBY STOCK EXCHANGE
WHERE DEALERS BUSILY TRADED
THE COMPANY'S SHARES,
AND THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM.
YET THIS DUTCH FINANCIAL
SYSTEM STRUCK LAW
AS NOT QUITE COMPLETE.
TO LAW'S FINANCIALLY
SUPERCHARGED MIND,
THE DUTCH WERE MISSING
A TRICK OR TWO.
FOR ONE THING, IT SEEMED
COMPLETELY NUTS TO RESTRICT
THE NUMBER OF EAST
INDIA COMPANY SHARES
WHEN THE MARKETS WERE SO
CLEARLY ENAMORED OF THEM.
LAW WAS ALSO PUZZLED
BY THE CONSERVATISM OF
THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM.
IT HAD CREATED AN
INTERNAL SYSTEM
WHICH ALLOWED MERCHANTS
TO SETTLE THEIR ACCOUNTS BY
DIRECT CASHLESS TRANSFERS,
BUT IT HADN'T ISSUED ANY REAL
BANK NOTES TO THE PUBLIC.
THE IDEA WAS
ALREADY TAKING SHAPE
OF A BREATHTAKING MODIFICATION
OF THE INSTITUTIONS THAT
LAW HAD FIRST ENCOUNTERED
HERE IN AMSTERDAM.
ONLY COMBINE THE PROPERTIES
OF A MONOPOLY TRADING
COMPANY AND A PUBLIC BANK,
AND THE SKY REALLY
WOULD BE THE LIMIT.
LAW WAS PREPARING TO UNLEASH
A WHOLE NEW SYSTEM OF FINANCE
ON AN UNSUSPECTING NATION.
IN 1716, JOHN LAW
ARRIVED IN PARIS.
HE HAD IDENTIFIED FRANCE
AS THE IDEAL LABORATORY
FOR WHAT WOULD BE THE
BIGGEST EXPERIMENT
IN THE HISTORY OF
THE STOCK MARKET.
BUT WHY DID THE FRENCH
GIVE HIM HIS CHANCE?
THE ANSWER IS THAT FRANCE'S
FISCAL PROBLEMS WERE
EXCEPTIONALLY DESPERATE.
THE COUNTRY WAS SADDLED
WITH ENORMOUS PUBLIC DEBTS
AS A RESULT OF THE
WARS OF LOUIS XIV.
WHEN THE SUN KING DIED IN
1715, THE DUKE OF ORLEANS,
WHO WAS ACTING AS REGENT FOR
THE UNDERAGE KING LOUIS XV,
FACED A COUNTRY ON THE BRINK
OF ITS THIRD BANKRUPTCY
IN LESS THAN A CENTURY.
IT WAS THE PERFECT
OPPORTUNITY FOR LAW,
THE MAVERICK
SELF-TAUGHT ECONOMIST,
WHO DEVELOPED HIS
THEORY SOMEWHERE BETWEEN THE
CASINO AND THE STOCK MARKET.
LAW'S AMBITION WAS TO REVIVE
ECONOMIC CONFIDENCE IN FRANCE
BY ESTABLISHING A BANK
ON THE DUTCH MODEL
BUT WITH THE DIFFERENCE
THAT THIS BANK WOULD
ISSUE PAPER MONEY,
LIKE THIS 100 LIVRES NOTE.
AS MONEY WAS
INVESTED IN THE BANK,
THE GOVERNMENT'S HUGE DEBT
WOULD BE CONSOLIDATED.
AND THIS WAS THE REALLY
IMPORTANT PART OF LAW'S SYSTEM--
PAPER MONEY WOULD
REVIVE FRENCH TRADE,
AND WITH IT FRENCH
ECONOMIC POWER.
THE ROYAL GOVERNMENT
GAINED DOUBLY.
CONSOLIDATION SIMPLY MEANT
THAT ITS ONEROUS DEBTS WERE
MAGICALLY TRANSFORMED INTO
SHARES IN LAW'S BANK.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE
MONARCH GAINED THE ABILITY
TO PRINT AS MUCH
MONEY AS HE LIKED.
AS LAW WROTE, I MAINTAIN
THAT AN ABSOLUTE PRINCE
WHO KNOWS HOW TO GOVERN CAN
EXTEND HIS CREDIT FURTHER
AND FIND NEEDED FUNDS
AT A LOWER INTEREST RATE
THAN A PRINCE WHO IS
LIMITED IN HIS AUTHORITY.
IN CREDIT, SUPREME POWER MUST
RESIDE IN ONLY ONE PERSON.
THAT ABSOLUTE POWER WAS IN THE
HANDS OF THE DUKE OF ORLEANS,
WHO LIVED HERE IN
THE PALAIS-ROYAL,
JUST A SHORT STEP FROM LAW'S
APARTMENT IN THE PLAATS VAN DAM.
IT WAS TO HIM THAT LAW
NOW UNFOLDED HIS SCHEME.
THE PRIZE WAS NOTHING LESS THAN
THE REVIVAL OF FRENCH POWER
THROUGH FINANCIAL ENGINEERING,
BUT THAT WAS ONLY HALF
OF LAW'S INGENIOUS PLAN.
AS LAW WROTE...
THE BANK IS NOT THE ONLY,
NOR THE GRANDEST OF MY IDEAS.
I WILL PRODUCE A WORK
WHICH WILL SURPRISE EUROPE
BY CHANGES MORE POWERFUL
THAN WERE PRODUCED BY THE
DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES.
THE SECOND PART OF LAW'S
IDEA WAS THAT A HUGE
MONOPOLY TRADING COMPANY
SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED,
THE COMPAGNIE D'OCCIDENT,
AS HE PUT IT, THE WHOLE NATION
WOULD BECOME A BODY OF TRADERS.
AND LAW HIMSELF, NAMED HERE AS
THE COMPANY'S CHIEF DIRECTOR,
WOULD BE AT ITS HEAD.
THE FOCUS FOR THIS
WILDLY AMBITIOUS SCHEME
WOULD BE IN AMERICA,
WHERE THE FRENCH LAID CLAIM
TO A VAST TRACT OF LAND
EITHER SIDE OF THE
MISSISSIPPI, LOUISIANA.
THE REGENT GAVE LAW'S
COMPANY, WHAT WAS TO BECOME
THE MISSISSIPPI COMPANY,
A MONOPOLY ON TRADE
WITH THE NEW COLONY.
FRENCHMEN REGARDLESS
OF RANK WERE ENCOURAGED
TO BUY SHARES IN THE COMPANY.
LAW'S NAME HEADED THE
LIST OF DIRECTORS.
IN MODERN PARLANCE, WHAT THESE
DOCUMENTS TELL US IS THAT LAW
WAS ATTEMPTING A
REFLATION. AND WHY NOT?
FRANCE IN 1716 WAS
IN A DEPRESSION,
AND LAW'S BANK NOTES HELPED
STIMULATE A RECOVERY.
AT THE SAME TIME,
WHAT HE WAS DOING WAS
EFFECTIVELY TRANSFORMING
A BURDENSOME AND BADLY
MANAGED PUBLIC DEBT
INTO SHARES IN WHAT WAS
A PRIVATIZED TAX GATHERING
AND TRADE COMPANY.
WELL, WHAT WAS NOT
TO LIKE ABOUT THAT?
IN A FEVER OF MASS SPECULATION,
THE MISSISSIPPI COMPANY'S
SHARE PRICE SOARED FROM THE
ORIGINAL PRICE OF 500 LIVRES
TO 5,000 ON SEPTEMBER 4th.
BY DECEMBER 1719, IT
HAD REACHED 10,000.
AND THIS IS WHERE
IT ALL HAPPENED.
THIS WAS WHERE LAW'S SHARE
ISSUING OFFICE WAS LOCATED,
THE RUE QUINCAMPOIX.
AND YOU CAN IMAGINE THE
SCENES OF FRENZY HERE
AS HALF OF PARIS DESCENDED
ON THIS NARROW ALLEYWAY
ALL DESPERATE FOR A
PIECE OF THE ACTION.
THE HIGHER THE SHARE
PRICE WENT, THE MORE
THEY WANTED TO BUY.
IT WAS A CLASSIC STOCK
MARKET FEEDBACK LOOP.
IT WAS IN THESE HEADY TIMES
THAT THE WORD MILLIONAIRE
WAS FIRST COINED.
YES, MILLIONAIRES,
LIKE ENTREPRENEURS,
WERE INVENTED IN FRANCE.
AND BY JANUARY 1720, JOHN LAW
WAS THE RICHEST OF THEM ALL.
LOUIS XIV HAD SAID,
L'ETAT C'EST MOI.
I AM THE STATE.
NOW THE RENEGADE SCOTSMAN
JOHN LAW WAS ABLE TO SAY,
L'ECONOMIE C'EST MOI.
I AM THE ECONOMY.
ONLY WHEN THE MISSISSIPPI BUBBLE
BURST WOULD THE FRENCH REALIZE
THE DANGERS OF LAW'S
ECONOMIC EXPERIMENT.
NEXT TIME ON THE
ASCENT OF MONEY,
WE'LL SEE HOW WHAT BEGAN AS
A REVOLUTION IN FINANCE--
THE FIRST STOCK MARKET BUBBLE--
ENDED AS A FULL-BLOWN
POLITICAL REVOLUTION
IN WHICH ROYAL HEADS WOULD ROLL.
NEXT TIME ON THE
ASCENT OF MONEY,
BEFORE CHARLES PONZI
AND BERNIE MADOFF,
THE STORY OF JOHN LAW.
LIKE ALL PONZI SCHEMES,
THE EFFECT OF LAW'S SYSTEM
WAS TO GENERATE AN
UNSUSTAINABLE BUBBLE.
HIS BUBBLE WAS ABOUT TO GO POP.
AND THE BRITISH
ARISTOCRACY LEARNS
THAT WHAT GOES UP
MUST COME DOWN.
THIS HOUSE BELONGED TO
THE PRINCIPAL VICTIM
OF THE FIRST MODERN
PROPERTY CRASH.
THE ASCENT OF MONEY:
A FINANCIAL HISTORY
OF THE WORLD.
Announcer: TO FIND OUT MORE
ABOUT THE ASCENT OF MONEY
AND WATCH THE FILM, VISIT...
CAPTIONED BY THE NATIONAL
CAPTIONING INSTITUTE
--www.ncicap.org--
Announcer: FUNDING FOR
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
Woman: MY IDEA CREATED
JOBS FOR 2,000 PEOPLE.
Man: MY IDEA WILL BRING
RENEWABLE ENERGY TO EVERYONE.
Announcer: AN
ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN IDEA
CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
I HAVE AN IDEA.
Announcer: AND BY...
AND BY...